JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
GEORGE W. BUSH, Former President
of the United
States: These slain officers
were the best
among us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Addressing a
divided nation,
former President George W. Bush
and President
Obama honor the five officers
who died in
last week's ambush in Dallas.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The deepest fault lines of our
democracy have
suddenly been exposed, perhaps
even widened.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday:
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I have come here to make it as
clear as possible
as to why I am endorsing Hillary
Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: Bernie Sanders
throws his support
behind the presumptive
Democratic nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And continuing
our series The
End of AIDS, we go to the South,
America's
epicenter of the outbreak, where
a hard-hit
population is facing significant
barriers
to care.
DR. MELANIE THOMPSON, Fulton
County Task Force
on HIV/AIDS: Many of my friends
ask me, you
know, why are you working in
Atlanta? Everybody
works internationally. And I
feel like we
have a Third World epidemic, in
some ways,
here.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Attorney General
Loretta Lynch
urged Americans today to bridge
the divide
between police and the
communities they serve.
She spoke as the president
attended a service
in Dallas for five officers
killed by a sniper.
Lynch testified at a House
hearing, and said
stopping violence must be a
rallying point
for both police and minority
groups.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: It is
my hope that, as we all look at
these tragic
incidents, that we will take the
opportunity
to draw closer to each other, to
have the
difficult conversations about
race and policing
in this country, involving all
sides, involving
all issues and all points of
view.
GWEN IFILL: Lynch also faced a
battery of
Republican questions about the
investigation
into Hillary Clinton's e-mail
use. She defended
the decision not to charge
Clinton, but refused
to discuss details of the
investigation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
finally got
the endorsement today that she's
been waiting
for from primary season rival
Bernie Sanders.
The Vermont senator appeared
with Clinton
in New Hampshire and promised to
help defeat
Republican Donald Trump in
November. We will
hear what each had to say, and
look at what
today's moves means for the
Democratic Party,
later in the program.
GWEN IFILL: In South Sudan, the
capital city
of Juba was quiet after a
cease-fire took
hold. At least 272 people had
been killed
in five days of fighting between
rival factions.
Meanwhile, the United Nations
reported at
least 36,000 people are seeking
shelter at
U.N. sites and other locations.
And embassies
and aid groups began evacuating
staffers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At least 22
people were killed
in Southern Italy today when two
commuter
trains collided head on at high
speed. It
happened on a single track line
between two
towns in the region of Puglia.
Rescue workers
searched through mangled
wreckage, looking
for survivors and dozens of
injured.
And the Italian prime minister
interrupted
a trip to Milan.
MATTEO RENZI, Italian Prime
Minister (through
translator): After this very
brief greeting
to you, I will go back straight
to Rome because
of the train crash. And I have
ordered an
immediate investigation into
what happened.
I think absolute clarity must be
made on this.
We will not stop until we
understand what
happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Officials said
they won't be
sure of the final death toll
until a giant
crane can pull the wreckage
apart.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, House Republican
leaders confirmed there will not
be a vote
on gun control legislation until
after the
summer recess. Majority Leader
Kevin McCarthy
said it will wait until they
return in September.
Party leaders have been unable
to round up
enough votes for their bill to
ban people
on the terror watch list from
buying guns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a big day on
Wall Street:
The Dow Jones industrial average
reached a
record high, gaining 120 points
to close at
18347. The Nasdaq rose 34 points
and the S&P
500 was up 15, adding to its
record close
yesterday.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
President Obama's call for
healing at a Dallas
police memorial; will Bernie
Sanders supporters
follow his lead?; China doubles
down on its
claims in the South China Sea;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dallas mourned
its dead today,
the police officers cut down by
a sniper.
The occasion was an interfaith
memorial service,
where President Obama offered
reassurance
and a summons to build a better
country.
It was a moment to honor the
five officers
who died in Dallas and to speak
to a nation
on edge after days of bloodshed,
protest and
racial tension:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
It's as if the deepest fault
lines of our
democracy have suddenly been
exposed, perhaps
even widened.
And although we know that such
divisions are
not new, though they have surely
been worse
in even the recent past, that
offers us little
comfort.
Faced with this violence, we
wonder if the
divides of race in America can
ever be bridged.
I understand how Americans are
feeling. But,
Dallas, I'm here to say, we must
reject such
despair. I'm here to insist that
we are not
as divided as we seem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The ceremony took
place at
the Meyerson Symphony Center,
minutes from
the site of the sniper attack
that erupted
during a peaceful protest last
Thursday night.
Five seats were left open,
holding American
flags and police caps, in
tribute to the slain
policemen.
BARACK OBAMA: And despite the
fact police
conduct was the subject of
protest, despite
the fact that there must have
been signs,
or slogans, or chants with which
they profoundly
disagreed, these men and this
department did
their jobs, like the
professionals that they
were.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The sniper, Micah
Johnson,
told negotiators, during a
standoff, that
he wanted revenge for police
killings of black
men, including last week in
Baton Rouge and
St. Paul. Those killings sparked
widespread
protests, and the president
today urged each
side to understand the other.
BARACK OBAMA: When all this
takes place more
than 50 years after the passage
of the Civil
Rights Act, we cannot simply
turn away and
dismiss those in peaceful
protest as troublemakers
or paranoid.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: We also know that
so much of
the tensions between police
departments and
minority communities that they
serve is because
we ask the police to do too
much, and we ask
too little of ourselves.
Protesters, you know it. You
know how dangerous
some of the communities where
these police
officers serve are. And you
pretend as if
there's no context. These
things, we know
to be true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president had
cut short
his trip to Europe to attend the
service.
He was joined by the first lady
and Vice President
and Mrs. Biden, as well as
former President
George W. Bush and his wife,
Laura, who make
their home in Dallas.
GEORGE W. BUSH, Former President
of the United
States: Most of us imagine, if
the moment
called for, that we would risk
our lives to
protect a spouse or a child.
Those wearing
the uniform assume that risk for
the safety
of strangers.
They and their families share
the unspoken
knowledge that each new day can
bring new
dangers. But none of us were
prepared or could
be prepared for an ambush by
hatred and malice.
The shock of this evil still has
not faded.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hundreds of
others attended
the tribute as well, among them,
dozens of
law enforcement officers from
Galveston County,
Texas. A local judge paid for a
bus to bring
officers on the 300-mile
pre-dawn trip.
In the end, the president
lamented he had
spoken to too many memorial
services during
his time in the White House, and
he appealed
to Americans to look deep into
their hearts.
BARACK OBAMA: And if we cannot
talk about
these things, if we cannot talk
honestly and
openly, not just in the comfort
of own circles,
but with those who look
different than us
or bring a different
perspective, then we
will never break this dangerous
cycle. In
the end, it's not about finding
policies that
work. It's about forging
consensus and fighting
cynicism and finding the will to
make change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After the
service, the Obamas
met privately with officers
wounded in the
attack, as well as the families
of those killed.
Funerals for the slain officers
begin tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: After winning 13
million votes,
22 states, and raising $200
million, Vermont
GWEN IFILL: After winning 13
million votes,
22 states, and raising $200
million, Vermont
Senator Bernie Sanders formally
stepped aside
today, throwing his weight to
presumptive
Democratic nominee Hillary
Clinton.
Then, both turned their focus to
Donald Trump.
It was everywhere, emblazoned on
the campaign
stage and all of the signs,
"Stronger Together,"
the Clinton campaign motto.
But, today, it took on an
unmistakably altered
meaning, as Bernie Sanders and
Hillary Clinton
joined forces for the first
time.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I have come here to make it as
clear as possible
as to why I am endorsing Hillary
Clinton.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: The announcement
came in Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, the state that
handed Sanders
his first Democratic primary
victory, and
set up the protracted battle for
the party's
nomination.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: It is no
secret that
Hillary Clinton and I disagree
on a number
of issues. At the Democratic
platform committee,
which ended Sunday night in
Orlando, there
was a significant coming
together between
the two campaigns, and we
produced, by far,
the most progressive platform in
the history
of the Democratic Party.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Sanders didn't get
all he wanted
in the proposed platform, but
now it does
include a plank calling for
tougher regulations
on Wall Street, language
supporting a $15-an-hour
federal minimum wage, and
stronger words on
climate change.
Today, Sanders called Clinton
far and away
the best candidate in November.
Clinton, in
turn, appealed to his
supporters.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm asking you to keep working
in the weeks,
months, and, yes, years ahead.
You will always
have a seat at the table when I
am in the
White House.
GWEN IFILL: The event also
allowed the former
rivals to form a united front
against a common
foe, Republican
nominee-in-waiting Donald
Trump.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: While
Donald Trump is
busy insulting Mexicans, and
Muslims, and
women, and African-Americans and
our veterans,
Hillary Clinton understands that
our diversity
is one of our greatest
strengths.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Trump
and his cronies
are trying to pull the wool over
our eyes
and come back with the same
failed policies
that hurt us before.
GWEN IFILL: In response, the
Trump campaign
fired off press release after
press release,
many of them contrasting
Sanders' past statements
about Clinton with his
endorsement today.
One Trump attack took aim at
Clinton for the
former secretary of state's past
involvement
with the Trans-Pacific
Partnership, a proposed
trade deal that Sanders strongly
opposes.
Clinton repeated today that she
now opposes
the TPP as well. Still to come:
details on
Sanders' role at the party's
upcoming convention
and in the fall campaign.
Will the Sanders supporters get
on board?
We look at that road ahead for
Democrats with
Sanders supporter and former
Ohio State Senator
Nina Turner and former six-term
Vermont governor
and presidential candidate
Howard Dean, a
Clinton supporter.
So, Governor Dean, does an
endorsement like
that -- you have been here. You
have been
on the campaign trail. You have
conceded before.
Does an endorsement like that
matter?
HOWARD DEAN, Former Presidential
Candidate:
It does matter. It's actually
harder for the
supporters to get on board than
it is the
candidate.
But the candidate leads the way,
and this
is a big deal.
GWEN IFILL: Nina Turner, a lot
of Sanders
supporters, maybe not in that
room, have been
saying that Sanders sold out.
What are you
telling them?
NINA TURNER (D), Former Ohio
State Senator:
Well, Gwen, the senator has made
clear from
the beginning that he was going
to do everything
necessary he could to defeat Mr.
Trump.
And part of that promise that he
has made
begins today. And I do agree
with the governor.
It is definitely hard for
supporters, and
probably harder than the
candidate. And, yes,
all over Twitter, all over my
direct messages,
texts, phone calls, there are
people who support
the senator who are very
disappointed.
There has to be a grieving
process, some space
for Senator Sanders supporters
to kind of
digest this, because his
supporters, people
like me and others, never wanted
this day
to come. We have always wanted
Senator Sanders
to be that nominee. And, so,
yes, there is
a lot of hurting going on out
there.
GWEN IFILL: So, Howard Dean,
what happens?
How do you bring that hurting to
a point which
helps the actual presumptive
nominee?
HOWARD DEAN: Well, actually,
some of it has
already been done.
The platform -- really, Bernie
had a huge
influence on the platform. So,
from an issues
point of view, most of the
Sanders supporters
have gotten most of what they
want. That is
going to help a lot.
Second of all, Bernie is going
to do some
vigorous campaigning because
this platform
is a platform that Bernie likes.
And so, over
time, I think these wounds do
heal. I think
not only did most of my
supporters support
John Kerry enthusiastically. A
lot of my staff
went to work for John Kerry. And
it was tough.
It was a bitter primary, just as
this one
has been. But, look, you have
got to do what's
right for the country in the
end. And what's
right is Hillary Clinton and
what's wrong
for the country is Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: But, Governor Dean,
let me ask
you this. Hillary Clinton in
2008 decided
to concede one week after Barack
Obama clinched
the nomination. This took a
little longer.
Did Senator Sanders take too
long to endorse?
HOWARD DEAN: Absolutely not.
Everybody has
to do this at their own pace and
with their
own supporters in mind.
I think Bernie -- because Bernie
had such
an influence on the platform, I
think that's
enormously helpful. He needed
that extra time.
The platform changed, more
concessions than
I think most would have
expected. I think
that is going to help bring his
supporters
on board. And we need them.
GWEN IFILL: Nina Turner, did the
platform
change enough for you, and does
it matter
what the Democratic platform is
if the words
are different coming out of the
candidate's
mouth?
NINA TURNER: Well, it certainly
changed. But
for Senator Sanders continuing
to push, we
wouldn't have the $15 minimum
wage for federal,
that being affirmed in the
platform, abolishing
the death penalty, moving
marijuana, for example,
off of the federal Schedule 1.
So, Senator Sanders and his
supporters have
a lot to be proud of. But in
terms of the
TPP, of course, we are
disappointed. Senator
Sanders -- and I was there in
Orlando. I was
one of the platform committee
members, and
we fought vigorously to get the
Democratic
Party to say that they'd oppose
any vote on
the TPP in the lame-duck
session, but that
didn't happen.
GWEN IFILL: But let me ask
you...
(CROSSTALK)
NINA TURNER: So, we still have
much more work
to do, Gwen. We really do.
And it doesn't -- the senator
always said
that this wasn't about him, it's
about us.
And so there has to be folks out
there like
myself and others who will make
sure, to your
point, that that platform is not
just something
that's wonderful words on a
sheet of paper,
that if a Democrat wins, that
that platform
is executed through policy.
GWEN IFILL: But, as you point
out, yes, you
were on the platform committee.
And we heard
Hillary Clinton say, with great
force, that
she opposes the TPP, the
Trans-Pacific Partnership
trade agreement.
So, why isn't that enough? Why
does it matter
whether it's in the platform?
Doesn't it matter
what the candidate says?
NINA TURNER: Well, it needs to
be in there
because that is something that
we affirm,
and we affirm it very strongly.
And if both
candidates made it clear that
they oppose
it, Senator Sanders had the
opportunity to
push the secretary further left
on that, then
it shouldn't have been any
problem with the
platform committee members of
both candidates
voting to make sure that the TPP
wasn't voted
on in the lame-duck.
But that didn't happen,
unfortunately. But,
Gwen, it gives us something more
to continue
to fight for. Again, to Senator
Sanders supporters,
I want to say that this is not
the end, it
is the beginning. And the
revolution, the
political revolution that he has
started must
continue, because we have to
hold people accountable
to the platform, because a lot
of people out
there, Gwen, are concerned that
the platform
is just that, just pretty words
on a piece
of paper.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
HOWARD DEAN: Although, in
fairness, there
was a third problem, a third
party at the
table with the TPP, and that was
President
Obama.
And it would have been
incredibly unusual
to have a very successful
president, which
President Obama has been,
rebuked by the Democratic
Party platform. And I think that
was why the
TPP wasn't in the platform. It
would have
been seen as a rebuke to the
president of
the United States, who's done, I
think, a
great job.
NINA TURNER: He's done a
tremendous job, but
I don't necessarily consider --
I don't agree
with the governor on that.
But, yes, the president has done
a great job,
but people in the same family
can disagree.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
Well, let me ask you about
disagreeing in
the family. You, Nina Turner,
have been on
the record calling for perhaps a
third party.
Is that off the table now?
NINA TURNER: Well, I think that
both parties
could certainly benefit from
having another
party challenge -- challenge us
to do better.
I am a Democrat. I have been a
lifelong Democrat,
but I'm not just a Democrat to
be a Democrat.
I am a Democrat because of the
principles
and the values that we uphold,
and if we are
the strongest party, then we
shouldn't fear
other competition.
GWEN IFILL: Howard Dean, what,
in the end
-- you have known Bernie Sanders
for a long
time. You're from the same
state. You both
have run for president. And I'm
certain that
you have been watching this all
very closely.
What did he ultimately bring to
this campaign?
HOWARD DEAN: Bernie Sanders in
some ways was
more of a mover in this campaign
than anybody
else.
The core issue -- and we have
seen it all
over the world -- and the
British just had
a very unfortunate vote -- where
people left
behind by globalization are
lashing out. And
Bernie crystallized that and
talked about
the issues that we have to fix
if globalization
is going to work and if our
country is going
to be strong.
We have to help the people who
have been left
behind. We have to have better
schools, better
educational opportunities,
better inclusion,
better support of working people
who aren't
benefiting from globalization,
better tax
rules that aid creation of jobs
than -- more
so than creating opportunities
to shift paper
around on Wall Street.
Those are the things that Bernie
brought to
the table, and those are in the
platform.
I think he's transformed the
Democratic Party
and I think he's done it in a
very positive
way.
GWEN IFILL: Former Vermont
Governor Howard
Dean, former Ohio state Senator
Nina Turner,
thank you both very much.
NINA TURNER: Thank you, Gwen.
HOWARD DEAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
AIDS in Atlanta,
where gay black men are among
those most affected;
the disconnect between what high
schoolers
are taught and what actually
happens in politics;
and the family of a war
correspondent suing
the Syrian government.
But, first: A judgment was
handed down today
by an international tribunal
that could have
far-reaching effects in Asia. It
began as
a dispute between China and the
Philippines
over a huge expanse of the South
China Sea,
and China's assertion of control
there in
waters claimed by many
countries.
The area is a major fishing,
trade and energy
production corridor. And, today,
the Permanent
Court of Arbitration in The
Hague ruled against
China.
For more on this dispute, on the
case, and
its implications, I'm joined by
Bonnie Glaser
of the Center for Strategic and
International
Studies.
Bonnie Glaser, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
Remind us, first of all, what
was the dispute
that this international tribunal
was asked
to resolve?
BONNIE GLASER, Center for
Strategic and International
Studies: Well, the Philippines
brought this
case against China in January
2013, and there
are 15 requests that it made.
They're not about sovereignty
over territory,
because this tribunal is not
empowered to
rule on sovereignty issues
regarding territory,
but the Philippines was asking
other things.
It was asking, for example, that
China's nine-dash-line
claim be ruled invalid and that
China be told
that it doesn't have any
historic rights that
can be applied to waters that
give it any
special rights to have fishing
or energy exploitation
in waters that are in exclusive
economic zone
of the Philippines.
The Philippines also asked that
the tribunal
rule on the status of eight of
the features.
And the tribunal ruled on most
of those and
importantly found none of the
features are
full islands. So, none of them
get a 200-nautical-mile
exclusive economic zone. They
just get a 12-nautical-mile
territorial sea if they're a
rock, and some
of them are underwater, and they
get no maritime
entitlement whatsoever.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me just
stop you
there. What was China arguing
was the basis
for its territorial claim, then?
BONNIE GLASER: Well, China has
argued, as
has five other claimants, that
they own many
of the islands. Some of them,
like China and
Taiwan, claim all of the islands
in the South
China Sea.
This particular set of islands
is in the Spratlys.
It's the southern part of the
South China
Sea. And the Chinese rejected
this ruling
from the outset. They claimed
that the tribunal
didn't have jurisdiction on any
of these issues.
So, the Chinese refused to
participate in
the tribunal ruling. And they
have claimed
that it is not binding on China.
But, according to the Convention
on the Law
of the Sea -- and China is a
state party -- it
is binding on both parties, the
Philippines
and China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what does
it mean, then?
China, as you say, is rejecting
the ruling.
They're saying it's an invalid
-- was invalid
for the court to even consider
this. What
does it mean, then? Is it
enforceable in any
way, this decision?
BONNIE GLASER: There is no
enforcement mechanism,
Judy, under the Convention on
the Law of the
Sea. And so it's really left up
to the international
community to encourage China to
be a law-abiding
citizen and for China to see
that it's in
its interest to not be an
outlaw.
China wants to, I believe, rise
peacefully.
It doesn't want to have
confrontation with
its neighbors. So I think this
is going to
create some thinking, maybe
rethinking in
China about its approach top its
neighbors,
I hope. But in the short run,
we're likely
to see increased tensions, and I
think that
the Chinese might take some
steps to reassert
their claims, because Xi Jinping
will face
pressure domestically.
He has lost face on this issue,
because this
award, as they call it, the
decision, was
almost completely in favor of
the Philippines.
It was very one-sided.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you do see
China, perhaps,
rethinking its approach on this?
And, just
quickly, effect on the United
States, which
clearly has a lot at stake with
its allies
in the Pacific?
BONNIE GLASER: Yes, well, the
United States
has made its interests quite
clear in the
Pacific. It wants to have a
rules-based order
and wants to see China part of
that rules-based
order.
So we will have to see going
forward whether
this becomes a source of renewed
tensions
in the South China Sea between
China and its
neighbors and between the U.S.
and China,
or whether we can put this issue
on a diplomatic
track and find ways for
bilateral fishing
agreements, joint energy
exploration and other
ways, solve these disputes, and
find ways
to cooperate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of
questions coming out
of this ruling.
Bonnie Glaser with CSIS, the
Center for Strategic
and International Studies, we
thank you.
BONNIE GLASER: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, we continue
our series
The end of AIDS.
Yesterday, we looked at San
Francisco and
at one of the nation's most
ambitious plans
to curtail AIDS. Tonight, we
turn to a city
where the struggle is much more
difficult.
Atlanta, Georgia, and much of
the Southeast
is, by some measures, the
epicenter of America's
AIDS crisis.
And, as correspondent William
Brangham and
producer Jason Kane report, the
barriers to
stemming the epidemic there are
enormous.
This report was supported by the
Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The alarm
bells rarely stop
in the inpatient and isolation
wards at Grady
Memorial Hospital.
Here in Atlanta, just down the
street from
the CDC, in 2016, in the age of
lifesaving
antiretroviral drugs, hundreds
of people are
still dying every year from
AIDS.
DR. CARLOS DEL RIO, Emory Center
for AIDS
Research: The epidemic of HIV in
America is
forgotten, but not gone. People
have forgotten
it exists. I think I have a
better chance
of winning the lottery than I
have of ending
AIDS in where we are today,
right?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
Southeastern U.S. is
the epicenter of America's
epidemic. These
states make up 44 percent of
people living
with HIV, and they make up half
of all new
HIV diagnoses.
DR. CARLOS DEL RIO: It's almost
like the South
is a different country. It
really is about
poverty, the social determinants
of health,
racism. It's really a bunch of
different things.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Carlos Del Rio
is one of
Atlanta's leading HIV doctors.
He co-directs
the Emory Center for AIDS
Research, and sees
patients at Grady.
Often, he says, patients have no
idea of their
HIV status until it's nearly too
late.
DR. CARLOS DEL RIO: Half those
people we diagnose
here already have AIDS. In other
words, they
have been infected for five,
six, 10 years.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Russell Martin
was one of
them. Black gay men are one of
the hardest-hit
populations here in the
Southeast.
Martin thought he was perfectly
healthy, until
one day he came down with a
fever.
RUSSELL MARTIN, AIDS Patient:
I'm just thinking
it was a cold. I have asthma, so
I'm prone
to having pneumonia, so I'm
like, OK, maybe
it's just pneumonia.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: By the time he
checked into
Grady, he was so sick that
doctors induced
a near-coma in a desperate
attempt to save
him. He woke up to learn that he
had HIV,
it had progressed to AIDS, and
that he had
nearly died.
It's not that Martin didn't know
about HIV
or wasn't being careful. In
fact, he once
worked at an HIV clinic and got
tested regularly.
RUSSELL MARTIN: I got routine
checks until
I got into a relationship. And
it was once
I was in a relationship, I
didn't do it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Because you
thought, "I'm
in a monogamous relationship, I
don't need
to be tested."
RUSSELL MARTIN: That's true.
That's what I
was thinking.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: While Martin
is currently
on treatment and doing well,
he's become further
evidence for an alarming
projection.
According to a recent analysis
that was done
by the CDC here in Atlanta, if
current trends
persist, half of gay and
bisexual black men
will be diagnosed with HIV in
their lifetimes,
half.
Fulton County Commissioner Joan
Garner has
been helping lead the push to
change the course
of the epidemic here in Atlanta.
She started
after hearing that few cities in
the country
have higher rates of HIV
JOAN GARNER, Fulton County
Commissioner: The
information has been out there.
Research is
out there. Treatments --
treatment is out
there. And I was just floored
when I heard
that, and I said, we have got to
do something
about this.
JOHN EAVES, Fulton County
Chairman: We certainly
have some new leadership.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Two years ago,
Garner and
council Chair John Eaves
assembled the Fulton
County Task Force on HIV/AIDS.
Fulton County
makes up the bulk of the city of
Atlanta.
WOMAN: This really shouldn't be
a conversation
anymore. This is low-hanging
fruit. We swing
the gate literally from one end
to the other.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Like San
Francisco, which
we reported on earlier, they are
one of the
first local governments in the
U.S. to formalize
a plan for ending AIDS. The
exact budget and
timeline of their work is yet to
be determined.
DR. MELANIE THOMPSON, Fulton
County Task Force
on HIV/AIDS: There are a lot of
people who
are working on this, not
necessarily working
together.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Melanie
Thompson is
helping lead the task force. She
says it's
unbelievable to her that it's
taken this long
to get started.
DR. MELANIE THOMPSON: It's
horrifying. I mean,
frankly, we have had a
smoldering epidemic
here for a long time. But when
you get a little
bit of political will, it goes a
long way,
and that is something that we
have never had
here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the
challenges are daunting,
something the task force has
been hearing
about as they have traveled
across the county,
meeting with various groups,
from gay, bisexual
and transgender organizations to
those who
inject drugs.
It's estimated there are 3,000
HIV-positive
people in the county who don't
know they're
infected, meaning they could
unknowingly be
spreading the virus to others.
DR. MELANIE THOMPSON: At a time
when San Francisco
is talking about getting to
zero, and New
York is talking about ending the
epidemic,
we still see increasing numbers
of new HIV
diagnoses in some of our
population.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For those who
do know their
status, and want to start
treatment, just
getting there can be arduous.
Claude Bowen's difficult commute
to the doctor
isn't uncommon in this sprawling
city. He
has no car and has to travel two
hours to
his appointments.
CLAUDE BOWEN, AIDS Patient: I
take one bus
to the train to another bus. If
I come down
here, I take a bus, the train,
another train,
then a bus.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And that's
just one way?
CLAUDE BOWEN: That's one way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: If a bus or
train is late,
he will miss the next leg, and
often his appointment
will be canceled entirely. For
these reasons
and many others, an estimated 40
percent to
50 percent of people in Fulton
County drop
out of HIV care once they have
started. For
others, even basic information
about treatment
can be a struggle.
DERRICK LANGFORD, AIDS Patient:
I'm going
for like this Bohemian-type
thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: When
22-year-old Derrick
Langford was diagnosed with HIV,
he had no
trouble opening up to friends
and family.
But he couldn't figure out what
to do next
or where to go for medication or
follow-up
care.
DERRICK LANGFORD: So, it was
pretty much me
searching, looking, using Google
a lot to
find out where I needed to go.
And the stress
kind of made me very, very sick.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's often
these kinds of
barriers, not riskier behaviors,
that drive
these high rates of infection.
In fact, gay
black men don't engage in
higher-risk behaviors
compared to, say, white gay men.
Repeated
studies have proven that.
They often have fewer partners
and use condoms
more, says Wendy Armstrong.
She's medical
director of the Ponce De Leon
Center, Grady
Hospital's massive outpatient
clinic for Atlanta's
HIV-positive community.
DR. WENDY ARMSTRONG, Ponce De
Leon Center:
There's so much easy blame:
Those people shouldn't
be doing those things. And that
is not the
situation at all. It is that it
is such a
prevalent disease in our
population for a
group of patients who don't have
easy access
to care.
DANIEL DRIFFIN, Fulton County
Task Force on
HIV/AIDS: People living with HIV
should be
at all levels of engagement.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Daniel Driffin
is a member
of the task force. He's
HIV-positive himself,
and he says the Achilles' heel
of the fight
against HIV in the South is
stigma. He says
even he feels it.
DANIEL DRIFFIN: I thought I did
something
wrong, being that I'm now
HIV-positive, on
top of being black, on top of
being gay, and
in the South.
MAN: So this is the South, the
Bible Belt,
and so when it comes to HIV,
it's like we're
doing something that's immoral
to what we
have been taught as children.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: While stigma
about being
gay has always been a problem in
much of the
U.S., Driffin says it's
particularly an issue
in the black community. And he
says it's complicit
in the rising rates of HIV
infection.
DANIEL DRIFFIN: We see what
happens when people
do tell that they're gay. We see
what happens
when people do say that they're
HIV-positive.
They're homeless the next
morning, or the
same day. You know, they're
being assaulted.
MAN: A local man could be facing
federal hate
crimes charges.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He points to a
recent case
where a man walked into his
girlfriend's house,
discovered her son in bed with
another man,
and threw boiling water onto
them.
DANIEL DRIFFIN: He boiled a pot
of water on
the stove, took the pot of water
and poured
it all over them. And,
literally, they were
in the hospital for four months.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Melanie
Thompson says, while
all these impediments are
finally being acknowledged
and talked about openly, the
region still
has major hurdles to overcome
them.
One example, among many,
funding. Georgia
was one of the states that
didn't expand Medicaid
under the Affordable Care Act,
so it's got
much less money to care for its
poor HIV-positive
patients.
DR. MELANIE THOMPSON: Many of my
friends ask
me, you know, why are you
working in Atlanta?
Why don't you go work in Africa,
or Asia,
or whatever? Everybody works
internationally.
And I feel like we have a Third
World epidemic,
in some ways, here, that's
difficult to address.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Three years
after nearly
dying of AIDS, Russell Martin is
a testament
to the power of successful HIV
treatment,
and to what many hope Atlanta
will do more
of. He's now studying law and
looking towards
graduation. The virus is fully
suppressed
in his blood. He's trying daily
to get healthier
still.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Atlanta, Georgia.
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow night, our
reporting
continues with a look at New
York, the state
with more HIV-positive people
than any other
in the U.S.
You can follow our series online
as well.
Here's what you will find there:
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: On the
"NewsHour"'s Web
site, you will find more
reporting from our
series on HIV/AIDS. There, you
can see stories
from people we met around the
world. You can
read more about the effort to
find a cure
and see all the video reports
broadcast on
air, The End of AIDS, at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's always been
the case that
the political science taught in
textbooks
can be a far cry from politics
as practiced
in the real world.
But given how different and
unusual this year's
presidential election has been,
it's presented
a particular challenge in some
school settings,
trying to square the civics book
with the
2016 campaign as it's unfolded.
Special correspondent Lisa Stark
of Education
Week visits a high school in
Maryland just
two hours from the White House,
where teachers
are trying to help students
understand this
out-of-the-ordinary election.
It's part of our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
BRUCE FOX, Teacher: Good
morning.
STUDENTS: Good morning.
BRUCE FOX: Good morning. We're
going to start
with a warmup today. Number one,
what are
the three constitutional
requirements to be
president?
LISA STARK: Bruce Fox's 12th
grade A.P. government
class has been following this
presidential
election as the field has
winnowed down and
the rhetoric has heated up.
BRUCE FOX: And this year, you
can easily make
the argument that it's like that
on steroids.
LISA STARK: Is it ever.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
She's a world-class liar. Just
look at her
pathetic e-mail server
statements or her phony
landing.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump's ideas aren't just
different.
They are dangerously incoherent.
LISA STARK: From television to
Twitter, it's
been an unruly campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: Crooked Hillary
Clinton. We
can't let it happen.
LISA STARK: To help students cut
through the
noise, Bruce Fox is trying out
his own ballot.
BRUCE FOX: We are going to look
at scandals,
lies and incivility in the 2016
presidential
election. You are going to
categorize each
incident and rate it.
I think that this year presents
extra challenges
because the political parties
traditionally
have had a platform that was
predictable and
well-known, and, this year,
things are a little
bit more all over the place.
LISA STARK: Students are
examining controversial
issues involving Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton.
BRUCE FOX: The main thing is, I
would you
like to categorize this, is this
a lie, is
this is a scandal, what is it,
and then finally
rate it.
I wanted students to be thinking
about, well,
some of these things that we're
hearing about,
maybe they don't matter that
much, and others
are more important. Not -- just
because something's
in the news doesn't necessarily
mean it's
a big deal, or it should really
influence
any kind of decisions when it
comes to voting.
STUDENT: He speeches, Haiden
(ph) loves this
one. Clinton gave three speeches
at Goldman
Sachs for $225,000 each. Clinton
has refused
to release the content of her
speeches.
STUDENT: Think that's a scandal,
too?
SEAN LYNCH, Student: It's a lie.
STUDENT: A lie? OK?
SEAN LYNCH: Yes, because she
won't, like,
admit to, like, what's going on.
I follow a lot of them on
Twitter. I don't
feel like it's a good source of
information,
but it is where a lot of
candidates can slip
up. Like Donald Trump, for
instance, he does
say a lot of not-so-smart things
on Twitter
that you wouldn't think someone
running for
president would say.
All right, Trump and women.
STUDENT: Here we go.
SEAN LYNCH: Trump has often
offended many
women by retweeting an
unflattering picture
of Heidi Cruz.
BRUCE FOX: If a student is
getting a tweet
with some shocking thing, their
thought process
shouldn't be, oh, man, that
person is a jerk
and that's horrible. It should
be more than
that. It should be, is this
accurate?
Do you think she should release
the speeches?
SEAN LYNCH: Definitely. If she
wants people
to stop saying that she's being
fake about
it, she should release them.
LISA STARK: Civics education is
an age-old
subject, one of the founding
principles of
America's public schools.
Maryland is the
only state to require a U.S.
government exam
to graduate, although virtually
all states
require some civics education.
In 10 other states, students
will need to
take the U.S. citizenship test.
JESSICA SPROUT, Teacher: That
freedom of expression
is guaranteed by our First
Amendment, which
says?
STUDENT: You can have whatever
religion you
want, or you don't have to have
a religion
at all.
JESSICA SPROUT: OK.
LISA STARK: Jessica Sprout
teaches U.S. government
to ninth-graders, a topic she
says has an
impact far beyond the classroom.
JESSICA SPROUT: You have got to
know how the
government works to be an
informed citizen
and to be successful. That's the
only way
a democracy works, is if people
are involved.
LISA STARK: In recent years,
there have been
high-profile attempts to
strengthen the civics
curriculum, including by former
Supreme Court
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor,
over concerns
the subject is getting short
shrift.
SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR, Former
Supreme Court
Justice: I wanted to teach young
people in
America how they can be part of
the governmental
structure and help decide what
problems to
tackle and how to solve them.
LISA STARK: A Tufts University
study found
young adults who recalled having
strong civics
classes were more likely to
vote, and certainly
this year, interest in the
election is high.
JESSICA SPROUT: I was teaching
in the last
election cycle, and I honestly
don't remember
many discussions at all from
kids. This time
around, even the freshmen have
an opinion.
LISA STARK: Bruce Fox wants his
students -- many
will be first-time voters -- to
be thoughtful
about their opinions. He's
hoping today's
lesson encourages them to think
about what
it means to be presidential. How
much do character
and judgment count?
BRUCE FOX: Why don't we start
with each group?
And you will share what your big
takeaway
here was.
STUDENT: Donald Trump is just
full of lies
and Hillary Clinton just has
secrets. Neither
of them are actually fit.
BRUCE FOX: OK. If some of you
are undecided
voters, what are you going to be
looking to
these candidates to say or do
between now
and November?
Lauren?
STUDENT: Act like civilized
adults.
LISA STARK: A lesson even the
candidates might
benefit from.
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you.
I'm Lisa Stark from Education
Week, reporting
for the "PBS NewsHour."
AUDIENCE: USA! USA!
JUDY WOODRUFF: Looking for ways
to engage
students in this year's
presidential election?
Check out "NewsHour" Extra for
lesson plans,
activities, and videos. That's
at PBS.org/NewsHour/Extra.
GWEN IFILL: Hundreds of
thousands of people
have died in Syria since the
conflict began
there nearly five-and-a-half
years ago.
Few who have lost loved ones
have any hope
of gaining justice for their
deaths. But the
family of Marie Colvin, an
American journalist
killed in Syria in 2012, with
French photographer
Remi Ochlik, is suing the
government of Syria
in an American court.
The Colvin family says they're
not seeking
retribution, but accountability.
William Brangham is back with
that story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Marie Colvin
was considered
one of the bravest journalists
of her generation.
She covered war and armed
conflict across
the world, mostly for The Sunday
Times of
London.
She lost an eye covering
conflict in Sri Lanka
in 2001. But in February of
2012, she would
lose her life covering the war
in Syria.
Colvin was again on assignment
for The Times
of London when she was killed by
a rocket
fired by the Syrian government.
She was in
the city of Homs, an epicenter
of the uprising
against Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad.
Her body was found in a
makeshift media center.
ABU SHADI, Shop Owner (through
translator):
Homs is in a mess and chaos,
killing, stealing.
People are dying. We closed our
shops. Every
day, two or three or four get
kidnapped. Shame
on them. We want to finish this.
This is not
a solution.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Despite the
indiscriminate
shelling of the city, Colvin's
younger sister,
Cathleen, says that Marie's
death was no accident.
CATHLEEN COLVIN, Sister of Marie
Colvin: I
was absolutely sure from the
very beginning
that she was targeted. The
timing of her last
report out of Homs was -- seemed
like too
much of a coincidence.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That last
report was a series
of phone interviews Colvin did
with American
and British TV networks. In
them, she described
the Assad government's attack on
civilians
in Homs.
This one was with the U.K.'s
Channel 4 News.
MARIE COLVIN, Journalist: I am
at ground zero,
and I am seeing what's being
hit. Civilian
buildings are being hit. In the
clinic today,
if you can even call it that --
it's an apartment,
has two operating tables, and a
dentist and
a doctor.
There was a tiny baby, well,
1-year-old, naked,
hit in the left chest. The
doctors just said,
we can't do anything. And we had
to watch
the baby's little tummy,
desperate for breath,
die.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hours later,
the building
where she was working was hit.
Cathleen Colvin believes the
Assad regime
intentionally targeted her
sister, and she
and her family has now filed a
wrongful death
suit against the Syrian
government in a federal
court in Washington, D.C. They
allege Marie
Colvin was assassinated as part
of a -- quote
-- "conspiracy by senior members
of the regime
of Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad to surveil,
target and ultimately kill
civilian journalists."
The suit names President Assad's
brother,
as well as other top military
and intelligence
commanders.
CATHLEEN COLVIN: It went right
and directly
up to Assad's office, to the
office of the
president. And his younger
brother was put
in charge of this apparatus that
was specifically
directed to target foreign
journalists. And
the intention was to silence
them, so that
the Assad regime could operate
with impunity.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But it's not
just top officials
that Colvin blames. She points
the finger
at a local woman she says sealed
her sister's
fate.
CATHLEEN COLVIN: This female
informant, who
I picture lurking outside the
media center
the night before, and was able
to visually
confirm Marie's location.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There was a
Syrian citizen
that you believe was able to
inform the government,
the journalists are here?
CATHLEEN COLVIN: Yes. They had
already zeroed
in using her -- using the Skype
that she was
-- that was what she was using
to report out.
And they had that signal
intercepted. And
so they had located the
position, and this
woman visually confirmed it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Evidence for
these claims
was uncovered by the Center for
Justice and
Accountability, a nonprofit
human rights organization
based in San Francisco.
Colvin says the proof of their
allegations
will come to light as the case
progresses.
Colvin hopes the lawsuit will
bring a measure
of accountability to the Assad
regime for
what she says it did to her
sister and to
the people of Syria.
CATHLEEN COLVIN: All the pain
that my family
has experienced I know is
repeated every day
in Syria.
JEFFREY BROWN: Cathleen's oldest
daughter,
Marie's niece, is named as a
plaintiff in
the lawsuit. She and her
siblings were especially
devastated by the loss.
CATHLEEN COLVIN: They talked to
her all the
time from war zones. She called
us from Tahrir
Square holding the phone up and
saying, "You
have to hear this. There is an
uprising. The
world is going to change."
Marie is the most amazing and
unique person
I have ever known and I'm sure
ever will know.
I feel incredibly lucky to have
had such a
close relationship with her.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Colvin also
wants to recognize
the importance of journalists in
conflict
zones.
CATHLEEN COLVIN: As Marie said,
tyrants like
Assad can just do whatever they
want with
impunity, with the world never
knowing the
truth.
And it's happening now in Syria.
It's one
of the most dangerous places to
report from.
And it's becoming more and more
difficult
to know what's really happening.
So, to a
certain extent, he's winning. He
has silenced
the press.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Marie
Colvin's sister
hopes that, through this
lawsuit, one journalist
who fell silent can be heard
once again.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
Seventeen larger-than-life sea
creatures have
taken up residence in the
nation's capital
this summer.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
recently paid
them a visit.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Octavia the
octopus, Priscilla
the parrot fish, and Flash the
marlin, all
sculptures now on display at
Smithsonian's
National Zoo in Washington,
D.C., and all
made of trash pulled from the
Pacific Ocean.
ANGELA HASELTINE POZZI, Washed
Ashore: All
of this is garbage off the
beaches.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Angela Haseltine
Pozzi is the
lead artist and executive
director of Washed
Ashore, a nonprofit seeking to
educate the
public on the plastics polluting
the word's
oceans.
ANGELA HASELTINE POZZI: We
create sculptures
that can teach people about the
problem. And,
as an artist, it is a real
challenge to use
everything that comes up off the
beach.
JULIA GRIFFIN: In six years,
Haseltine Pozzi
and her team of volunteers have
created 66
sculptures from more than 38,000
pounds of
debris collected from a stretch
of Oregon's
coastline.
The countless bottle caps,
flip-flops and
beach toys are just a fraction
of the more
than 315 billion pounds of
plastic estimated
to be in the world's oceans.
Such plastics
not only pose entanglement
threats to Marine
animals, but are often mistaken
for food.
WOMAN: I think it's a really
different way
to show the message, because, in
the art,
there were things that you would
never expected
to be washed on the ocean. There
was a million
lighters and all these different
things that
were really surprising to find.
WOMAN: I thought it was lovely,
really colorful,
and eye-catching. And it
actually makes you
think about the waste that's in
the sea and
just how much there is.
LUKE, Child: You can't put trash
in the ocean
because it will hurt animals.
JULIA GRIFFIN: As scientists
debate how to
clean up the water, Haseltine
Pozzi hopes
her sculptures will inspire
visitors to curb
pollution in the first place.
For the "PBS NewsHour," from the
National
Zoo, I'm Julia Griffin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a great way
to learn about
what's in the ocean.
GWEN IFILL: Absolutely.
On the "NewsHour" right now:
Heavy winter
rains have caused algae in some
parts of Florida
to bloom, hurting tourism and
causing the
governor to declare a state of
emergency.
It has been such a large problem
that a NASA
satellite caught images of the
bloom from
space. All that and more is on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally
tonight...
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Keep talking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a behind-the-scenes
look at what it's like to work
and live in
America's most famous residence.
That's the focus of a special
documentary
tonight on PBS called "The White
House: Inside
Story." It features unusual
access, as well
as interviews with President
Obama, first
lady Michelle Obama, and former
presidents
and first ladies.
Here's an excerpt about a part
of the White
House less seen, the living
quarters.
NARRATOR: Between managing
affairs of state
and responding to the people's
concerns, the
president may have the most
demanding job
in the country, but you can't
beat the commute.
From the West Wing, it's a short
trip down
the hall and upstairs to the
place they call
home, the official residence.
Here, they can
escape the spotlight and try to
live a normal
life.
SUSAN FORD BALES, Daughter of
Gerald Ford:
My parents actually brought some
of their
furniture from Alexandria to the
White House.
My dad wanted his easy chair
that he had had
forever. He wanted it at the
White House.
There used to be a president's
bedroom and
a first lady's bedroom.
Well, my mother said, "We have
slept together
for 20-some-odd years, and we're
going to
continue." So they took the
president's bedroom
and made it into their private
den with their
furniture that they were
comfortable with.
They said, "If we're going to do
this, we're
going to do it so that we're
comfortable and
it feels like us."
ROSALYNN CARTER, Former First
Lady: After
a few weeks, it becomes home,
and you would
be going along and not thinking
every day
about, here I am and what am I
doing? Then
you look down, and here is
Abraham Lincoln's
place. And you get this
incredible feelings.
It gives me chills now even when
I think about
it.
BARBARA BUSH, Former First Lady:
The upstairs
at the White House, which isn't
seen by everybody,
is filled with history. You feel
a lot of
history, and you hope you can
live up to it.
WOMAN: Every room has 100
stories. This is
where Jackson was. This is where
Lincoln was.
This is where Teddy Roosevelt
today. This
is where the kids played.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Abraham Lincoln was able to have
regular office
hours, where people would come
and wait outside
his office, which was over in
the residence.
And, you know, without an
appointment, if
they waited long enough, they
might get in
to see him.
And they could seek his help on
everything
from trying to get a job to
asking for a pardon
for their child.
LAURA BUSH, Former First Lady:
Every time
you walk in the hall upstairs in
the residence,
you think about the people who
have lived
there before you.
GWEN IFILL: You can watch "The
White House:
Inside Story" this evening on
most PBS stations.
You may see someone you know.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.